
h2. Web Publishing

ExpressionEngine’s publishing features are broad, comprehensive, and highly flexible.

* Multiple Channels/Site Sections
* Custom Entry Fields
* Search Engine Friendly URLs
* Custom Statuses
* Multiple Categories
* RSS and ATOM Syndication
* Moblog Publishing
* Relationships
* Entry Versioning
* Multi-Entry Editing
* Entry View Tracking
* Ping Servers
* HTML Formatting Buttons
* URL Titles
* Sticky Topics
* Future Entries
* Expiring Entries
* Pagination
* Article Pagination
* Image and File Uploading
* Image Resizing and Thumbnailing
* Image and File Browsing
* Emoticons
* Bookmarklet

h2. Commenting

ExpressionEngine’s user commenting system lets your community participate in the discussion.

* User Commenting System
* Comment Membership
* Comment Moderation
* Comment Expiration
* Comment Pagination

h2. Typography

ExpressionEngine has sophisticated typography tools—a writer’s dream!

* Auto Typographic Formatting
* Auto Convert MS Word Characters
* Auto Convert High ASCII to Entities
* Automatic Linking
* Email Anti-Spam Encoding
* Typographic Plugin Support

h2. Tracking

Keep track of what’s happening on your site including most viewed and commented posts.

* Referrer Tracking
* Hit Tracking
* Statistical Tracking
* Online User Tracking
* Search Term Log

h2. Template Engine

Our template engine permits you to build dynamic, content driven websites using simple, yet powerful, tags.

* Full Page Modeling
* Conditional Operators
* Custom Global Variables
* Sub-Templates
* Template Access Control
* PHP in Templates
* Custom SQL Queries
* Template Exporting
* Template Library
* Versioning System
* Customizable Workspace
* Template Notes

h2. Communications

ExpressionEngine lets you manage your mailing lists and send email in a variety of ways.

* Multi-Protocol Support
* Flexible Email Options
* Mailing List Manager
* Mail Caching
* Batch Processing

h2. Search

ExpressionEngine has a powerful search engine and query tools.

* Search Engine
* Search Term Log
* IP Searching

h2. Spam Deterrents

No other publishing platform gives you as many tools to prevent comment and trackback spam as ExpressionEngine.

* Blacklist
* Captcha
* Comment Time Interval
* Rank Denial
* Secure Form Mode
* Duplicate Data Denial
* Site Membership

h2. Utilities

ExpressionEngine’s powerful utilities help you manage your site.

* SQL Manager
* Extension Manager
* Admin Logs
* Search and Replace
* Data Export
* PHP Info

h2. Add-Ons

ExpressionEngine comes with 22 add-on modules and over 100 plugins.

* Discussion Forum
* Moblog
* Wiki
* Channel
* Member Manager
* Mailing List
* Simple Commerce
* Blogger/MetaWeblog API
* Recently Updated Sites
* RSS
* Email
* Search
* Referrer
* Blacklist/Whitelist
* Statistics
* Query

h2. Member Management

Build a community with ExpressionEngine’s robust and flexible membership capability.

* Multi-User System
* Member Groups
* Custom Member Fields
* Member Activation
* Profile Management
* Subscription Management
* Member Localization
* Member Communication
* Email Console Logs
* Member Quick Links
* Note Pad

h2. Data Caching

ExpressionEngine’s data caching features allow you to reduce your server load while retaining all the benefits of dynamically generated information.

* Template Caching
* Query Caching
* Tag Caching

h2. Security

ExpressionEngine has the most comprehensive suite of security features of any publishing platform on the market.

* Session Management
* Secure Form Processing
* Captcha
* Throttling
* Duplicate Data Denial
* Multi-Password Denial
* IP and User Agent Logging
* Password Lockout
* Secure Password Mode
* IP Banning
* Email Banning
* Username Restriction
* Word Censoring